---
layout: lecture
title: "Potpourri"
date: 2019-01-29
---

## Backups (Jose)
## Systemd (Jose)
## FUSE (Jose)
## Keyboard remapping (Jose)




## APIs (Jon)

We've talked a lot in this class about using your computer more
efficiently to accomplish _local_ tasks, but you will find that many of
these lessons also extend to the wider internet. Most services online
will have "APIs" that let you programmatically access their data. For
example, the US government has an API that lets you get weather
forecasts, which you could use to easily get a weather forecast in your
shell.

Most of these APIs have a similar format. They are structured URLs,
often rooted at `api.service.com`, where the path and query parameters
indicate what data you want to read or what action you want to perform.
For the US weather data for example, to get the forecast for a
particular location, you issue GET request (with `curl` for example) to
https://api.weather.gov/points/42.3604,-71.094. The response itself
contains a bunch of other URLs that let you get specific forecasts for
that region. Usually, the responses are formatted as JSON, which you can
then pipe through a tool like [`jq`](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/) to
massage into what you care about.

Some APIs require authentication, and this usually takes the form of
some sort of secret _token_ that you need to include with the request.
You should read the documentation for the API to see what the particular
service you are looking for uses, but "[OAuth](https://www.oauth.com/)"
is a protocol you will often see used. At its heart, OAuth is a way to
give you tokens that can "act as you" on a given service, and can only
be used for particular purposes. Keep in mind that these tokens are
_secret_, and anyone who gains access to your token can do whatever the
token allows under _your_ account!

[IFTTT](https://ifttt.com/) is a website and service centered around the
idea of APIs â€” it provides integrations with tons of services, and lets
you chain events from them in nearly arbitrary ways. Give it a look!

## Common command-line flags/patterns (Jon)

Command-line tools vary a lot, and you will often want to check out
their `man` pages before using them. They often share some common
features though that can be good to be aware of:

 - Most tools support some kind of `--help` flag to display brief usage
   instructions for the tool.
 - Many tools that can cause irrevocable change support the notion of a
   "dry run" in which they only print what they _would have done_, but
   do not actually perform the change. Similarly, they often have an
   "interactive" flag that will prompt you for each destructive action.
 - You can usually use `--version` or `-V` to have the program print its
   own version (handy for reporting bugs!).
 - Almost all tools have a `--verbose` or `-v` flag to produce more
   verbose output. You can usually include the flag multiple times
   (`-vvv`) to get _more_ verbose output, which can be handy for
   debugging. Similarly, many tools have a `--quiet` flag for making it
   only print something on error.
 - In many tools, `-` in place of a file name means "standard input" or
   "standard output", depending on the argument.
 - Possibly destructive tools are generally not recursive by default,
   but support a "recursive" flag (often `-r`) to make them recurse.
 - If you want to run one program "through" another, like `ssh machine
   foo`, it can sometimes be awkward to pass arguments to the
   "inner" program (`foo`), as they will be interpreted as arguments to the
   "outer" program (`ssh`). The argument `--` makes a program _stop_
   processing flags and options (things starting with `-`) in what
   follows: `ssh machine --for-ssh -- foo --for-foo`.

## Window managers (Jon)

Most of you are used to using a "drag and drop" window manager, like
what comes with Windows, macOS, and Ubuntu by default. There are windows
that just sort of hang there on screen, and you can drag them around,
resize them, and have them overlap one another. But these are only one
_type_ of window manager, often referred to as a "floating" window
manager. There are many others, especially on Linux. A particularly
common alternative is a "tiling" window manager. In a tiling window
manager, windows never overlap, and are instead arranged as tiles on
your screen, sort of like panes in tmux. With a tiling window manager,
the screen is always filled by whatever windows are open, arranged
according to some _layout_. If you have just one window, it takes up the
full screen. If you then open another, the original window shrinks to
make room for it (often something like 2/3 and 1/3). If you open a
third, the other windows will again shrink to accommodate the new
window. Just like with tmux panes, you can navigate around these tiled
windows with your keyboard, and you can resize them and move them
around, all without touching the mouse. They are worth looking into!

## VPNs (Jon)

VPNs are all the rage these days, but it's not clear that's for [any
good reason](https://gist.github.com/joepie91/5a9909939e6ce7d09e29). You
should be aware of what a VPN does and does not get you. A VPN, in the
best case, is _really_ just a way for you to change your internet
service provider as far as the internet is concerned. All your traffic
will look like it's coming from the VPN provider instead of your "real"
location, and the network you are connected to will only see encrypted
traffic.

While that may seem attractive, keep in mind that when you use a VPN,
all you are really doing is shifting your trust from you current ISP to
the VPN hosting company. Whatever your ISP _could_ see, the VPN provider
now sees _instead_. If you trust them _more_ than your ISP, that is a
win, but otherwise, it is not clear that you have gained much. If you
are sitting on some dodgy unencrypted public Wi-Fi at an airport, then
maybe you don't trust the connection much, but at home, the trade-off is
not quite as clear.

You should also know that these days, much of your traffic, at least of
a sensitive nature, is _already_ encrypted through HTTPS or TLS more
generally. In that case, it usually matters little whether you are on
a "bad" network or not -- the network operator will only learn what
servers you talk to, but not anything about the data that is exchanged.

Notice that I said "in the best case" above. It is not unheard of for
VPN providers to accidentally misconfigure their software such that the
encryption is either weak or entirely disabled. Some VPN providers are
malicious (or at the very least opportunist), and will log all your
traffic, and possibly sell information about it to third parties.
Choosing a bad VPN provider is often worse than not using one in the
first place.

## Markdown (Jon)

There is a high chance that you will write some text over the course of
your career. And often, you will want to mark up that text in simple
ways. You want some text to be bold or italic, or you want to add
headers, links, and code fragments. Instead of pulling out a heavy tool
like Word or LaTeX, you may want to consider using the lightweight
markup language [Markdown](https://commonmark.org/help/).

You have probably seen Markdown already, or at least some variant of it.
Subsets of it are used and supported almost everywhere, even if it's not
under the name Markdown. At its core, Markdown is an attempt to codify
the way that people already often mark up text when they are writing
plain text documents. Emphasis (*italics*) is added by surrounding a
word with `*`. Strong emphasis (**bold**) is added using `**`. Lines
starting with `#` are headings (and the number of `#`s is the subheading
level). Any line starting with `-` is a bullet list item, and any line
starting with a number + `.` is a numbered list item. Backtick is used
to show words in `code font`, and a code block can be entered by
indenting a line with four spaces or surrounding it with
triple-backticks:

    ```
    code goes here
    ```

To add a link, place the _text_ for the link in square brackets,
and the URL immediately following that in parentheses: `[name](url)`.
Markdown is easy to get started with, and you can use it nearly
everywhere. In fact, the lecture notes for this lecture, and all the
others, are written in Markdown, and you can see the raw Markdown
[here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/missing-semester/missing-semester/master/_2020/potpourri.md).



## Hammerspoon (Anish)
## Booting + Live USBs (Anish)
## Docker, Vagrant, VMs, Cloud, OpenStack (Anish)
## Notebook programming (Anish)
## GitHub (Anish)
